Pneumonia is an infection of the lung
parenchyma that fills the alveoli with inflammatory
fluid, cells, and debris.
For respiratory therapists, this is not
just an infection problem,
it is a gas exchange and airway clearance
problem.
Normally, alveoli are filled with air and
allow oxygen to
move into the bloodstream.
In pneumonia, those alveoli fill with
fluid instead.
This reduces ventilation, while perfusion
may continue,
creating a ventilation-perfusion mismatch.
In severe cases, this becomes shunt-like
physiology,
leading to hypoxemia.
Clinically, patients often present with
fever,
cough, sputum production, dyspnea,
and pleuritic chest pain.
On assessment, you may hear crackles,
bronchial breath sounds, or ronchi.
You may also see tachypnea, increased work
of breathing,
and decreased oxygen saturation.
Early in the disease, patients may
hyperventilate,
causing a low PaCO2.
But as fatigue sets in, PaCO2 can rise.
This is a critical transition.
A rising PaCO2 with worsening mental
status is a major red flag for ventilatory
failure.
Diagnostics typically include a chest
x-ray showing infiltrates or consolidation,
along with ABG analysis and oxygenation
monitoring.
Sputum may be present, and may require
RT-assisted collection.
There are different types of pneumonia,
including community-acquired,
hospital-acquired, ventilator-associated,
aspiration,
and opportunistic.
Recognizing the type helps predict
severity and guide management priorities.
From an RT perspective, your priorities
include assessing oxygenation,
ventilation, work of breathing, breath
sounds,
and secretion burden.
You must determine if the patient can
maintain oxygenation, ventilate
effectively, clear secretions, and protect
their
airway.
Management may include oxygen therapy,
escalation to high-flow nasal
cannula or non-invasive support, and in
severe cases,
intubation and mechanical ventilation.
Airway clearance is also key, especially
in patients with weak
cough or excessive secretions.
Red flags include refractory hypoxemia,
rising CO2,
altered mental status, hypotension, and
inability
to clear secretions.
These patients require immediate
escalation.
The key takeaway is this.
Pneumonia becomes dangerous when the
patient can no longer oxygenate,
ventilate, or protect their airway.
As an RT, your job is to recognize that
transition
early and act quickly.